Parallel Scan on Ascend AI Accelerators
Bart lomiej Wr´oblewski∗
Gioele Gottardo†
Anastasios Zouzias†
Abstract. We design and implement parallel pre-
fix sum (scan) algorithms using Ascend AI accelera-
tors. Ascend accelerators feature specialized computing
units—the cube units for efficient matrix multiplication
and the vector units for optimized vector operations. A
key feature of the proposed scan algorithms is their ex-
tensive use of matrix multiplications and accumulations
enabled by the cube unit. To showcase the effective-
ness of these algorithms, we also implement and evalu-
ate several scan-based operators commonly used in AI
workloads, including sorting, tensor masking, and top-k
/ top-p sampling.
Our single-core results demonstrate substantial per-
formance improvements, with speedups ranging from
5× to 9.6× compared to vector-only implementations
for sufficiently large input lengths.
Additionally, we
present a multi-core scan algorithm that fully utilizes
both the cube and vector units of Ascend, reaching
up to 74.9% of the memory bandwidth achieved by
memory copy. Furthermore, our radix sort implementa-
tion, which utilizes matrix multiplications for its parallel
splits, showcases the potential of matrix engines to en-
hance complex operations, offering up to 3.3× speedup
over the vector-only baseline.
1
Introduction Parallel scan is a fundamen-
tal parallel computing paradigm with many applica-
tions [7, 30].
Due to its importance, parallel scan
has been studied in several models of computation, in-
cluding the circuit (work and depth) and the Parallel
Random-Access Machine (PRAM) model [9].
In the
circuit model, the depth and size trade-offs for parallel
optimal prefix circuits are well-understood for binary
operations [46, 52], but other models are yet to be ex-
plored, especially in the heterogeneous computing do-
main [13, 53].
Despite many attempts, there is a large gap be-
tween abstract parallel machine models and the cur-
rent state-of-the-art accelerators that contain heteroge-
neous computing units, see [37] and [2, 45, 27].
For
example, hardware vendors have manufactured acceler-
∗Work done while the author was employed at Huawei Zurich
Research Center.
†Computing Systems Lab, Huawei Zurich Research Center,
Zurich, Switzerland (anastasios.zouzias@huawei.com).
ators with specialized compute engines known as matrix
engines or tensor core units.
A list of such special-
ized hardware units includes Google’s TPUs [24, 25],
Nvidia’s Tensor Cores [41], AMD’s Matrix Cores [1]
and Huawei’s Ascend Cube Unit [34, 35] to name a
few. Moreover, in the CPU domain, examples of such
units (or extensions) are ARM’s Scalable Matrix Ex-
tension (SME) [3], Intel’s Advanced Matrix Extensions
(AMX) [22] and IBM’s POWER10 Matrix-Multiply As-
sist (MMA) [48]. Therefore, today’s high-performance
processors contain matrix engines that allow efficient
multiplication of constant-sized matrices, making ideas
from the early 1980s [29, 47] a reality and initiating
fruitful debates within the community [14].
Given the presence of matrix engines in computing
systems, a model of computation was recently proposed
to capture matrix multiplication accelerators called
the Tensor Core Unit (TCU) model [11, 12].
The
authors of [12] initiated the study of TCU algorithms
and revisited classical paradigms in the TCU model.
The study of accelerating prefix sum (and reduction)
operations using matrix multiplication units was first
initiated in the seminal paper of [13]. A follow-up work
presented a logarithmic-depth parallel scan algorithm
in the TCU model of computation, where only matrix
multiplication operations are required [53].
Although
the main algorithm in [53] offers stronger theoretical
guarantees than that of [13], its poor memory access
patterns limit its practical performance.
Here, we focus on simpler algorithms inspired
by [13] that achieve performance close to hardware peak.
Our top-performing multi-core scan kernels combine
ideas from [13, Alg. 6], explicit software-managed asyn-
chronous pipelining between matrix and vector cores,
and a novel matrix-vector recomputation strategy in
the up-sweep scan phase. Furthermore, we demonstrate
that our proposed scan kernels can be easily composed
to deliver the best-performing kernels for AI workloads
on Ascend.
In short, we draw inspiration from both these
works [12, 13] to advance the study of parallel scans on
matrix multiplication accelerators. As a case study and
an evaluation environment, we use Huawei’s Ascend AI
accelerators and the Compute Architecture for Neural
Networks (CANN) software ecosystem of Ascend to
Copyright © 20XX by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited
arXiv:2505.15112v2  [cs.DC]  2 Jan 2026

evaluate our proposals [33].
Our main contributions are listed below:
• We design, implement, and evaluate parallel scan
algorithms specialized for the Ascend AI accelera-
tor. The distinguishing feature of the proposed al-
gorithms is the extensive use of the Ascend matrix
multiplication engines (“Cube cores”). In particu-
lar, we implement several scan variants, including
single-core and multi-core scans, scans on multi-
ple arrays (batched scan), inclusive/exclusive scans
and specialized scan implementations for boolean
(mask) inputs using the cube unit’s 8-bit integer
capabilities.
• We evaluated the proposed scan algorithms that
use a single cube and vector units, demonstrating
a 5× up to 9.6× speed-up compared to the baseline
scan (vector unit only).
• We present multi-core scan algorithms that fully
utilize both the cube and vector units of the Ascend
910B4 accelerator, reaching up to 74.9% of the
theoretical memory bandwidth of memory copy.
Moreover, the MCScan algorithm (Algorithm 4.3)
attains a 15.2× speedup over the corresponding
single-cube variant when utilizing all 20 available
AI cores.
• We implement a list of computational kernels (op-
erators), including parallel split, compress/com-
pact and top-p (nucleus) sampling essential to AI
workloads. In all of these cases, we demonstrate
significant performance improvements.
• Lastly, we implement radix sort, whose parallel
splits take advantage of the cube units. The radix
sort implementation provides up to 3.3× speed-up
over baseline sorting that does not utilize the cube
units.
Next, we briefly emphasize the key distinction between
the above contributions and prior art.
First, the
multi-core scan algorithm is novel (to the best of our
knowledge) since it performs partial recomputation of
the reduction values on both the cube and vector
units in its first phase.
This recomputation strategy
is different compared to all previously known scan
strategies on accelerators, see Section 2.1.
Such a
recomputation strategy could be of interest to other
matrix multiplication accelerators as well.
Second, our radix sort implementation yields an
intriguing result:
in practice, multiple small dense
matrix multiplications can be leveraged to improve the
end-to-end performance of parallel sorting.
Although
the algorithmic ideas and techniques underlying this
result are well-established [10], we believe that it paves
the way for interesting research directions in the future.
As an example, we pose the following question, see also
the presentation of [11]. Is it possible to also utilize the
multiple-add capabilities of the matrix multiplications
units to improve further the performance of parallel
sorting? It is important to note that, despite relying on
the matrix multiplications for scan operations during
parallel splits, our radix sort does not exploit the
multiply-add capability of the matrix unit.
2
Background In this section, we give an over-
view of related work in computing parallel scans using
accelerators, focusing mostly on matrix multiplication
accelerators.
We also present the Tensor Core Unit
(TCU) model of computation, and we give a summary
of a selected list of scan-based primitives. The inclu-
sive prefix sum of a sequence of elements x1, x2, x3, . . .
equipped with a binary associative operator ⊙is the
sequence x1, x1 ⊙x2, x1 ⊙x2 ⊙x3, . . . .
2.1
Scan Strategies on Accelerators Numer-
ous parallel scan implementations and libraries have
been proposed in the literature [15, 50, 20, 44, 4, 5, 40,
38]. Here, we discuss the most relevant work focusing
on scan implementations targeting accelerators, most
notably Graphics Processing Units (GPUs). Horn was
one of the first to implement parallel scans in GPUs [43,
Chapter 36], followed up with several improvements.
In a nutshell, GPU scan implementations primarily
follow a two-level hierarchical approach where the high-
est level of the hierarchy is the block level. An efficient
scan implementation follows one of these scan strate-
gies: Scan-Scan-Add (SSA), Reduce-Scan-Scan (RSS),
or Stream-scan according to the state-of-the-art decou-
ple lookback scan approach of [38].
Scan-Scan-Add
(SSA) means that the (local) scans are initially com-
puted per block. Second, the values of the largest in-
dex of each block are collected and scanned. Third, the
collected per-block scan values are broadcast-added to
their corresponding blocks. Similarly, the RSS approach
makes a block-level reduction first, followed by a scan
of the block-level reductions and a final scan of each
block. We refer the interested reader to [38, Section 3]
for a more detailed discussion.
Scan is a memory-bound operation and, hence, the
main drawback of the SSA and RSS scan strategies
is the high number of elements that are read and
written to global memory.
In particular, for input
length N, SSA reads/writes ≈4N elements, whereas
RSS reads/writes ≈3N elements.
Such a reduction
in the memory access size is critical for improving the
performance of scans.
Copyright © 20XX by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited

StreamScan and decouple look-back strategies ac-
cess only 2N memory elements but need to efficiently
handle the sequential data dependency of the scan
computation using adjacent (block) synchronization,
see
[21, Chapter 11.7].
StreamScan is a single-pass
approach in which each thread block is assigned a tile
of input, and a serial dependency between the blocks
exists [50]. The critical feature of StreamScan is that it
requires synchronization between adjacent blocks only
(without global block-level synchronization). The de-
coupled look-back strategy of [38] aims to alleviate the
drawbacks of the serial dependency of StreamScan by
performing redundant work to “dissociate” local com-
putation from the latency of global prefix propagation.
Both StreamScan and decouple look-back strategies re-
quire only
2N data movement to global memory: N
input elements are read, N output elements are writ-
ten.
To the best of our knowledge, the state-of-the-
art scan algorithm on GPUs follows a highly-tuned
decoupled look-back and backoff approach, which is
briefly explained in [17].
2.2
Tensor Core Unit (TCU) Model To the
best of our knowledge, the Tensor Core Unit (TCU)
model is the only model of computation that has
been recently proposed to capture matrix multiplica-
tion accelerators [11]. The TCU model is a standard
RAM model with an additional circuit, named tensor
core unit, that performs matrix multiplication between
constant-size matrices. Although the TCU model cap-
tures well a single matrix multiplication computational
unit of today’s accelerators, it ignores other essential
features: the presence of vector processing units and,
more critically, the multi-core nature of these acceler-
ators.
Since the TCU model considers only a single
matrix multiplication unit, it does not allow its users to
conduct a work/depth algorithmic analysis [9]. Due to
the above limitations, any algorithmic analysis in the
TCU model will not correspond to a realistic execu-
tion in Ascend, i.e., ignoring parallelism and the vector
units. Nevertheless, we discuss the work/depth asymp-
totic analysis of the proposed algorithms, assuming the
presence of multiple matrix engines and vector units,
considering their operations as basic operations.
2.3
Applications of Parallel Scan Parallel
scan has a plethora of applications [30, 7].
Here, we
restrict our attention to scan applications that enable us
to generate efficient computational kernels (operators)
that appear in AI workloads.
In particular, we have
identified that sorting, weighted sampling, masking
of tensors, and top-k/top-p sampling are essential.
All these applications of the parallel scan are well-
known, but the observation that top-p sampling can
benefit from scan seems to be new (to the best of our
knowledge).
3
Ascend AI Accelerators In this section, we
briefly discuss the DaVinci architecture of Ascend ac-
celerators consisting of the cube and vector computing
units, mostly following [35]. Moreover, we discuss the
AscendC programming model of Ascend, a recently pro-
posed programming model for Ascend operator develop-
ment. All the material presented here is available online
at https://www.hiascend.com.
3.1
Ascend Hardware Huawei Ascend 910B is
a recent series of Huawei chips designed to accelerate
neural network training and inference. For the scope
of the paper, an accelerator can be seen as a grid of
computing units called AI Cores and a global High
Bandwidth Memory (HBM) with L2 cache.
In the Ascend 910B series, an AI Core consists of
one AI Cube (AIC) core and multiple, usually two, AI
Vector (AIV) cores. Each AIC and AIV core contains
a scalar unit for basic arithmetic operations, program
flow control, calculating addresses, and dispatching in-
structions. Each core also includes computing engines
(either vector or cube ones), local memory buffers, and
Memory Transfer Engines (MTEs). MTEs are respon-
sible for moving data between global and local memory
buffers. Both MTEs and computing engines have sepa-
rate instruction queues and work in parallel, so it is the
programmer’s responsibility to ensure synchronization.
An AI Vector core performs vector operations simi-
lar to traditional SIMD operations. The input and out-
put data of an AI Vector core must be allocated to the
local scratchpad/buffer called Unified Buffer (UB). AIV
cores support simple arithmetic operations such as vec-
tor addition and more complex ones such as gather and
reduce.
An AI Cube core is primarily responsible for matrix
multiplication operations. The AI Cube core contains
a hierarchical scratchpad memory structure (L1, L0A,
L0B, L0C, BT, FP buffers) and a cube computing
engine.
An AIC core can be configured to multiply
two matrices of almost arbitrary sizes. It also supports
result accumulation, selected activation functions, and
quantization operations. The cube core supports both
floating point and low-precision integer data types,
i.e. float16 (with float32 output) and int8 (with int32
output).
Figure 3.1 shows the Ascend architecture where the
Cube and Vector units are separate cores. In the 910B
architecture, data can only be exchanged using global
memory and/or L2 cache.
Copyright © 20XX by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited

Vector Scratchpad Memory
Cube Unit
Vector Unit
L1 Buffer
L0A Buffer
L0B Buffer
BT Buffer
FP Buffer
G
L
O
B
A
L
M
E
M
O
R
Y
L0C Buffer
FixPipe
Scalar Unit
Vector Scratchpad Memory
Vector Unit
Scalar Unit
Scalar Unit
AI Vector Unit 1
AI Vector Unit 2
AI Cube Unit
Figure 3.1: Architecture of Ascend 910B accelerators. Each
AI core contains one cube and two vector units.
4
Scan Algorithms on Ascend In this section,
we discuss the design and implementation of parallel
scan algorithms using matrix multiplication accelera-
tors.
Although the Ascend AI accelerator is used as
a case study for the implementations, we aim to decou-
ple the fundamental algorithmic ideas from the intricate
architectural details of the Ascend accelerator as much
as possible.
Matrix multiplication is an essential operator in
our discussions here; hence, we introduce some linear
algebraic notation that will be used throughout the
paper.
We denote matrices using boldface font and
capitals, i.e., A, B, C. We use s to denote the size of
square matrices, i.e., As, and define ℓ:= s2. We drop
the subscript on the matrices when the dimension is
clear from the context. We denote matrix multiplication
between A and B by C := A @ B. We denote by Us
the upper-triangular all-ones square matrix of size s,
including ones on the main diagonal. Ls is the lower
triangular all-ones of size s.
L−
s is the strictly lower
triangular all-ones of size s: L−
s has zeroes on the main
diagonal. 1s denotes the all-ones square matrix of size s.
We denote one-dimensional arrays using boldface font
and lower-case: r, x, y, z. We frequently partition an
array x into tiles of length ℓ, i.e., tiles are contiguous
blocks of ℓentries of x. We note an arbitrary ℓ-tile of
x by xℓ. We also view a tile xℓas a row-major matrix
A having s rows and s columns (zero-pad if necessary).
In Section 4.1, we present two scan algorithms (Al-
gorithm 4.1 and Algorithm 4.2) that use a single ma-
trix multiplication unit; we call these algorithms re-
spectively ScanU and ScanUL1, based on which constant
matrices they use. The key ingredient here is to uti-
lize Ascend’s cube unit effectively. In particular, Algo-
rithm 4.2 performs multiple matrix multiplications and
utilizes the accumulation buffer of the Cube unit to com-
pute the scan of an input tile of length ℓ, whereas Algo-
rithm 4.1 computes s consecutive scans of smaller tiles
of length s using a single matrix multiplication.
In Section 4.2, we present a multi-core scan algo-
rithm (MCScan, Algorithm 4.3) tailored for the Ascend
AI accelerator. A key feature of MCScan is that it uti-
lizes all the available cube and vector cores. MCScan and
its extensions are designed for scenarios involving very
large one-dimensional arrays.
In Appendix B.1, we build on top of the ScanU and
ScanUL1 algorithms and extend them into batched
scan variants that operate on multi-dimensional arrays
(tensors). We highlight that such extensions are non-
trivial, as several issues arise when scheduling many
scan operations across multiple cores, including padding
and improving load balancing on vector/cube units with
a 2:1 ratio, among others.
4.1
Warm-up: single cube scans In this sec-
tion, we present two scan algorithms that utilize a single
cube and vector units. Both algorithms are tailored to
the DaVinci architecture and are based on the linear al-
gebra fact that if A is the row-major matrix view with
s columns of a vector x then:
Matrix multiplication A @ Us computes “lo-
cal” scans of tiles of size s of x.
1
0
Us
x
+
+
+
+
x
y
Cube unit
Vector unit
Global Memory
L0A
L0B
L1C
xl
yl
UB
Figure 4.1: Data path from an input tile xℓto an output
tile yℓof the ScanU (Algorithm 4.1).
Both algorithms process their tiles using a pipelined
execution strategy. The critical path or span of both
proposed algorithms is linear on the input length for
constant values of s, since there is a sequential depen-
dency on the partial sums. Therefore, these kernels are
more effective when the input array to be scanned has a
relatively short length. Additionally, designing and im-
plementing scan algorithms that use a single cube core
is a building block for extending these ideas to a multi-
core scenario, as seen in Sections B.1 and 4.2.
Copyright © 20XX by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited

The first algorithm, ScanU (Algorithm 4.1), com-
putes s consecutive local scans of tiles of size s using
the cube unit and then propagates the partial sums us-
ing a single vector unit. More precisely, once the cube
unit has computed the local row scans of a matrix tile
of size ℓ, the tile is sent to a vector core for further pro-
cessing. The vector core will add a scalar to each row
to correct the prefix sum. It is important to note that
to obtain the correct prefix sum, the vector core keeps
track of the last value of each ℓ-tile and propagates it
to the next tile.
Figure 4.1 depicts the data movements and the
memory view of ScanU. The input vector x is shown
in blue.
A tile xℓof x and Us are loaded into
the cube unit where the matrix multiplication occurs.
The matrix multiplication result is written to global
memory. The vector unit reads the cube unit output
tile and propagates the prefix sum in place.
The
whole process, which consists of memory transfers and
cube/vector operations, is pipelined over the input tiles
using AscendC software pipeline capability.
Algorithm 4.1 Scan Cube-Vector (ScanU)
1: procedure ScanU(x, s)
2:
Let y be the output array
3:
partial ←0 ▷Accumulation value (Vector Unit)
4:
Load Us in L0B
5:
for each s2-tile of x: xℓdo
▷Pipelined exec.
6:
Load xℓto L0A
▷Cube unit
7:
C ←As @ Us
▷acc. off, free L0A
8:
Copy C from L0C to yℓin GM
9:
Vector unit waits tile from Cube unit
10:
Copy yℓfrom GM to UB
▷Vector unit
11:
for each s-tile of yℓ: ys do
12:
ys ←ys + partial
13:
partial ←last entry of ys
14:
Copy yℓfrom UB to GM
15:
Return y
The second algorithm, ScanUL1 (Algorithm 4.2),
is an Ascend adaptation of [13, Algorithm 6] and is
based on a matrix identity that expresses the scan of
an array z of length ℓusing matrix operations. View z
as a square row-major matrix A of size s = ⌈
√
ℓ⌉(pad
with zeroes if needed). Given z, the inclusive scan of z
(scan(z)) can be computed as:
(4.1)
scan(z) = As @ Us + L−
s @ As @ 1s,
ignoring any padded values. Equation 4.1 first appeared
in [13].
ScanUL1 uses Equation 4.1 to scan each
consecutive tile of size ℓ(Lines 6-12 of Algorithm 4.2),
and then propagates the last value of the partial sums
Algorithm 4.2 ScanUL1 is adaptation of [13, Alg. 6]
1: procedure ScanUL1(x, s)
2:
Let y be the output array
3:
partial ←0 ▷Accumulation value (Vector Unit)
4:
Load Us, L−
s , 1s in L1
5:
for each s2-tile of x: xℓdo
▷Pipelined exec.
6:
Load xℓto L0A and 1s to L0B
▷Cube unit
7:
C1 ←As @ 1s
8:
Copy C1 from L0C to L1
9:
Load Us to L0B
10:
C2 ←As @ Us
11:
Load L−
s in L0A and C1 in L0B
12:
C2 ←C2 + L−
s @ C1
13:
Copy C2 from L0C to yℓin GM
14:
Vector unit waits tile from Cube unit
15:
Copy yℓfrom GM to UB
▷Vector unit
16:
yℓ←yℓ+ partial
17:
partial ←last entry of yℓ
18:
Copy yℓfrom UB to GM
19:
Return y
sequentially.
In a high-level, for each tile of size ℓ,
the cube unit evaluates Equation 4.1 with the following
sequence of matrix operations:
C1 = As @ 1s
C2 = As @ Us
C2 = C2 + L−
s @ C1.
The above sequence of matrix operations has two ad-
vantageous properties with respect to data movements.
The first two steps of the above sequence share the left
matrix operand A, allowing us to load A only once in
L0A. Moreover, the third step effectively utilizes the ac-
cumulation buffer of the cube unit since C2 is reused in
the last two steps. Once the local scan of a tile of size ℓ
is computed, a single vector core adds the last value of
the previous scanned tile to the current tile (see Lines
14 −16 of Algorithm 4.2).
Does cube utilization imply performance? Although
the above scan algorithms demonstrate that it is pos-
sible to utilize the cube units for scan, it is un-
clear if cube utilization translates to performance im-
provements compared to “vector only” scan algorithms.
We provide an experimental evaluation demonstrat-
ing the benefits of using the Cube unit.
We devel-
oped a vector-only kernel that uses the CumSum As-
cendC API1 with CumSumInfo parameters set to 128
1CumSum
API
documentation
available
at
https://www.hiascend.com (accessed on 25 August 2024).
Copyright © 20XX by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited

and 128. We also set s = 128 on the cube scan algo-
rithms to ensure a fair comparison.
Figure 4.2 com-
pares the cube scan algorithms and the vector-only al-
gorithm provided by AscendC. The figure demonstrates
a significant performance improvement (5× for ScanU,
and 9.6× for ScanUL1) compared to the vector-only
CumSum algorithm. Moreover, the figure shows that the
ScanUL1 scan algorithm has roughly a 2× speedup com-
pared to ScanU. The critical insight here is that a more
sophisticated usage of the computational capabilities of
the cube unit can deliver further significant performance
improvements.
Figure 4.2: Execution time of AscendC::CumSum (vec only)
versus ScanU and ScanUL1 (log-log scale).
Work/Span Analysis of Single Core Scans. We
bound the work and span of the single-core algorithms.
For work, we separately report the number of square
matrix multiplications of size s and the sum of lengths
of the vector instructions similar to the Vector-RAM
model [8].
The number of matrix multiplications/ac-
cumulations for ScanU
and ScanUL1 are ⌈n/s2⌉and
3⌈n/s2⌉, respectively. The total vector work for both
algorithms is O(n).
Next, we bound the span of the algorithms. The
number of vector instructions called by the algorithms
ScanU and ScanUL1 are O(n/s) and O(n/s2), respec-
tively. Notice that the vector length of the ScanUL1 vec-
tor operations is O(s2).
Since the vector instruc-
tions are on the critical path, the span of ScanU and
ScanUL1 is O(n/s) and O(n/s2), respectively. In sum-
mary, ScanUL1 has a O(s)-depth speed-up compared
to ScanU, but, in practice, the achievable speed-up is
≈1.92 for s = 128, see Figure 4.2.
4.2
Multi-core Scan This section presents a
multi-core scan algorithm (MCScan, Algorithm 4.3) to
compute the prefix sum of large input arrays. For the
sake of clarity, the presented algorithm employs a 1-to-
1 vector-to-cube core ratio. Our implementation takes
advantage of the 2-to-1 ratio of 910B, but we consider
it an implementation detail.
MCScan is similar to the Scan-Scan-Add (SSA) par-
adigm of computing scans using a hierarchical parti-
tion of the input into blocks (top-level of the hierar-
chy) and tiles within each block, as discussed in Sec-
tion 2.1. MCScan consists of two phases separated by a
global synchronization barrier across all cores (blocks).
In contrast to previous methods, MCScan performs par-
tial re-computation of the block-level reductions during
its first phase, as we will explain next.
In the first phase, the cube and vector units work
in parallel to partially compute the first scan part of
SSA simultaneously. The cube units compute the local
prefix sums of all consecutive (row) tiles of size s and
write them back to global memory.
In parallel with
the cube units, the vector units compute the reduction
over the tiles and then hierarchically reduce the tile
reductions on a block-level granularity. The result of
these reductions is written in an array r where the i-th
entry equals the reduction of all the values of the i-th
block. By definition, r has length equal to the number
of blocks, B.
In the second phase, the vector units read the
local s-tile scans and reduction values per block r from
global memory. First, every vector core independently
computes the prefix sum of the array r in its local
scratchpad memory UB, i.e., performs a “small” scan
on the block-level reduction.
Next, each vector core
uses the scanned reduction values to propagate (add)
the results of the local s-tiled scans.
Work/Span Analysis of MCScan. First, we bound
the work of MCScan in terms of the number of matrix
multiplications of size s, and the number of vector
instructions (scalar-vector addition) of length s.
The
number of matrix multiplications of MCScan is ⌈n/s2⌉.
The vector instructions of length s consist of O(n/s)
reductions in the first phase, and O(n/s) scalar-vector
additions in the second phase. Hence, the total number
of vector operations is O(n/s).
The critical path of
MCScan is on the second phase where the vector units
propagate the partial sums, thus the span of MCScan is
O( n
sB ).
Exclusive scan and int8 support. We have added
support for exclusive scans and input with int8 data
type to our MCScan. The interested reader is referred to
Appendix B.2 for more details.
5
Operators based on Scan In this section, we
revisit several computational parallel primitives based
on parallel scans [6, 44]. Scan-based primitive include
weighted sampling, split and compress/compact (equiv-
alent to the masked select Pytorch operator).
It is
Copyright © 20XX by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited

Algorithm 4.3 Multi-core Scan (MCScan)
1: procedure MCScan(x, s, B) ▷B: number of blocks
2:
Let y be the output array
3:
Let r be an array of length B in GM
4:
parfor i-th block of x: x[i] do
▷Phase I
5:
Load Us in L0B
▷Cube Units
6:
for each ℓ-tile of x[i]: xℓdo
7:
Load xℓfrom GM to L0A
8:
C ←As @ Us
9:
Copy C in y[i] in GM
10:
Load x[i] to UB
▷Vector Units
11:
ri ←ReduceSum(x[i])
12:
Write ri on i-th entry of r in GM
13:
end parfor
14:
SyncAll: Synchronize all cube/vector cores
15:
parfor i-th block of y: y[i] do
▷Phase II
16:
Load r from GM to UB
17:
partial ←Sum first i entries of r
18:
for each ℓ-tile of y[i]: yℓdo
19:
for each s-tile of yℓ: ys do
20:
ys ←ys + partial
21:
partial ←last entry of ys
22:
Copy yℓfrom UB to GM
23:
end parfor
24:
Return y
well-known that radix sort can be implemented on top
of split [7, Section 1.3].
Also top-k can be imple-
mented on top of split using a partial quick-sort/select
approach [9].
Interestingly enough, current AI workloads like
Large Language Model (LLM) inference make implic-
itly heavy use of scan-based computational primitives,
including top-k and top-p (nucleus) sampling [18], see
also [16].
The top-p sampling implementation of the
popular open-source model Llama3 [49] contains a
batched sorting and prefix sum operation as the first
two PyTorch operations, see [39].
Figure 5.1: A diagram of well-known parallel scan applica-
tions considered here along with their dependencies.
In the rest of the section, we describe the split, com-
press, radix sort, top-k, top-p sampling and weighted
sampling operators in more detail. Figure 5.1 depicts the
dependencies between the scan-based primitives. Top-p
sampling extensively uses multiple scan operations, as
discussed in Section 5.5.
5.1
Split The split operation takes as input an
array x and a boolean flag array f of the same length.
Split reorganizes the elements of x into an output
array z as follows. It places all items of x where the
corresponding flag is true at the beginning of the output
array, followed by all items where the corresponding flag
is false. One crucial property of split is the relative order
of the elements is preserved, i.e., stable ordering.
We
implemented
a
split
AscendC
operator
SplitInd that also returns the output indices corre-
sponding to the original input locations. The output
indices of SplitInd allow us to implement a sorting
algorithm that satisfies the PyTorch API of sort(),
which also returns the indices. SplitInd takes as input
an array of 16-bit elements and a 0/1 mask array (flags
are stored in int8).
SplitInd executes an exclusive
scan using MCScan on the mask array. Afterwards, it
gathers the correct input elements and their indices,
using vector core’s GatherMask instruction and it stores
them in global memory at the offsets calculated by the
scan.
5.2
Compress Compress is a particular case of
split in which only the first part of the output ele-
ments of the split are returned. We have implemented
a compress kernel that internally uses the exclusive
MCScan algorithm on the mask array whose data type is
8-bit integers. Compress is equivalent to the PyTorch
torch.masked select operator that we use as a base-
line for comparison in the experimental section.
5.3
Radix Sort Radix sort is a well-known ap-
plication of the split operator [7, 10].
A radix sort
algorithm loops over the bits of the input elements,
starting at the least significant bit and executes a
split where the mask is obtained by reading the cor-
responding bit (radix) on each iteration. We implement
a Least-Significant Bit (LSB) radix sort in AscendC
using the split operator based on the MCScan algo-
rithm. We implemented an additional vector-only ker-
nel, RadixSingle, that extracts the radices of the inputs
before the execution of the split. RadixSingle makes
use of the AscendC vector instructions ShiftRight and
Not to create the input mask for split.
Additional
pre-processing and post-processing phases are needed
to support floats; see Exercises 8 and 9 in [26, Sec-
tion 5.2.5].
The pre-processing phase encodes all the
input elements by inverting the Most Significant Bit
(MSB) of positive numbers and all the bits of the nega-
tive numbers. Applying an unsigned integer radix sort
on the encoded elements will correctly order them. The
Copyright © 20XX by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited

post-processing phase is needed to decode the elements
back to the original value. We have implemented the
pre- and post-processing steps using AscendC bit-wise
vector instructions, and thus, support sorting of fp16.
The paper on evaluating radix sort using the Con-
nection Machine (CM-2) came to our attention in the
later stages of our radix sort development [10]. In this
work, the authors share several important implementa-
tion details for radix sort and floats that are replicated
here.
5.4
Top-k Top-k selection is an essential oper-
ation in various settings, including similarity search
queries [23] and Large Language Models (LLMs) infer-
ence where the output tokens are typically sampled from
the k tokens having the highest probability for the given
context [28]. The interested reader is referred to a recent
survey on parallel top-k [51]. A recent work on top-k is
Radik, a Radix-based GPU implementation that scales
well for large values of k [31, 32].
We implemented a top-k kernel using the selection
(partial quicksort) algorithm based on our SplitInd op-
erator and compared it against the baseline top-k op-
erator. Unfortunately, although improving the perfor-
mance of the top-k operator was a primary motivation
for this work, we could not improve the performance of
the baseline top-k for small values of k (k ≤4096).
5.5
Top-p or Nucleus Sampling Top-p sam-
pling in Large Language Model inference is an addi-
tional operation that applies sort and scan on the token
probability vector [18].
These operations are usually
batched with a constant batch size. Interestingly, if the
sorting step is implemented using radix sort, the top-
p sampling operator becomes a scan-intensive operator!
Indeed, top-p executes 17 scans for each batch: 16 scan
operations for radix sort (one scan per bit, fp16) and an
additional scan required by the algorithm.
Due to space constraints, the study of the weighted
sampling operator is deferred to the Appendix B.3.
6
Experimental Evaluation In this section, we
evaluate the performance of a selective list of parallel
scan algorithms and applications presented in the pre-
vious sections using Ascend AI Accelerators.
We evaluate the multi-core scan, compress, radix
sort, batch scan, and top-p sampling. We have imple-
mented all proposed algorithms in C++17 using the As-
cendC programming framework discussed in Section A.
We used the Ascend CANN toolkit 8.0.RC3.alpha002
with Ascend firmware and drivers versions 1.0 and
23.0.0, respectively. All evaluations are performed on
Huawei’s Ascend 910B4 accelerator.
In particular,
910B4 contains 20 Cube Units and 40 Vector Units (the
vector-to-cube units ratio is 2-to-1).
The theoretical
memory bandwidth of 910B4 is 800 GB/s.
The host
CPU is an AMD EPYC processor running on Ubuntu
22.04.
All timing measurements are collected using the
PyTorch profiler functionality in Python.
We used
Ascend’s PyTorch adapter2 with version v2.1.0 to re-
port all our PyTorch-related measurements. To wrap
our custom AscendC operators in PyTorch, we used
the open-sourced operator plugin framework at https:
//gitee.com/ascend/op-plugin.
op-plugin allows its
users to easily define a custom PyTorch operator. Be-
fore wrapping our operators using the op-plugin, we
used the msopgen3 tool to wrap the AscendC operators.
Evaluation against other accelerators/architectures
In this work, our primary motivation is to improve the
performance of parallel scans and their applications on
Ascend. In particular, our main objective is to design
and implement algorithms that saturate Ascend’s mem-
ory bandwidth. Comparing our results with architec-
tures like GPUs or TPUs would likely translate to com-
paring the hardware specifications, i.e. memory band-
width, rather than actually evaluating our algorithms.
In addition, a comparison between accelerators that are
not manufactured using the same technology node could
lead the reader to wrong conclusions. Nevertheless, we
present all our results in terms of bandwidth (GB/s or
GElems/s), which allows for easy comparison with other
architectures for the interested reader.
Figure 6.1:
Bandwidth of MCScan (Algorithm 4.3) for
s = 32, 64, 128. MCScan has 15.2× speedup against ScanU on
910B4 (20 AI cores).
6.1
Multi-core Scan (MCScan) Figure 6.1 de-
picts the performance of MCScan (Algorithm 4.3) on As-
cend 910B4 versus the state-of-the-art (torch.cumsum).
2https://gitee.com/ascend/pytorch
3https://www.hiascend.com/en/document
Copyright © 20XX by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited

We integrated the multi-core algorithm in PyTorch to
ensure a fair comparison and expose it as a custom Py-
Torch operator.
The custom PyTorch operator stati-
cally pre-allocates an upper triangular all-ones matrix
Us for all s = 32, 64, 128. The baseline operator doesn’t
use the cube unit, while MCScan takes advantage of all
the computing units reaching up to 37.5% of theoret-
ical memory bandwidth (peak bandwidth is 800GB/s
for 910B4). To have a more solid evaluation of our im-
plementation, we compare it to a copy kernel that per-
forms a memory copy; we used the torch.clone(). A
clear trend is that the larger the matrix multiplication
dimension s is, the better the performance of the multi-
core scan. s = 128 (almost) maximizes the utilization
of the level-0 scratchpad memories L0A and L0B of the
cube unit. We foresee that increasing the matrix mul-
tiplication tile size could lead to further performance
improvements, but we leave this investigation to future
work.
In addition, we investigate the additional per-
formance benefits of taking advantage of the lower-
precision input data (int8) capability of the cube unit;
the interested reader is deferred to Section B.4.
Figure 6.2: MCScan versus multi-core ScanUL1
6.1.1
Scan
Improvements We have imple-
mented two optimizations for MCScan. First, we imple-
mented an L2 cache optimization that we call “L2 cache
splitting”. This L2 cache optimization splits the input
into consecutive chunks so that the input and interme-
diate arrays fit in the L2 cache during the processing of
each chunk. Each chunk is processed serially, and the
last value of each chunk is propagated to the next chunk
to carry ahead the partial prefix sums. Figure 6.3 shows
a performance improvement of 25% for MCScan when
the “L2 cache splitting” optimization is enabled. This
optimization is already integrated in the MCScan.
Figure 6.3: L2 cache optimization of MCScan (s = 128).
Second, we designed and implemented a multi-core
ScanUL1 algorithm for fp16 by replacing the single ma-
trix multiplication during Phase I of MCScan with the
three matrix multiplications of ScanUL1. We call the
resulting algorithm, MCScanUL1. Figure 6.2 shows a per-
formance improvement of 33% of MCScanUL1 versus
MCScan and MCScanUL1 reaches up to 74.9% of the mem-
copy memory bandwidth as advertised in the abstract.
The improvement comes from the fact that ScanUL1 has
an O(s)-depth speedup compared to ScanU, see work/s-
pan discussion in Section 4.1.
In addition, we provide a performance breakdown
analysis of the up-sweep (Phase I) and down-sweep
(Phase II) phases of both MCScan and MCScanUL1 in Fig-
ure 6.4. The figure shows that, although the up-sweep
phase of MCScanUL1 is slightly longer than the up-sweep
phase of MCScan, the down-sweep phase of MCScanUL1 is
significantly shorter.
Figure 6.4: Break-down of up/down sweeps of scans.
6.2
Compress Figure 6.5 depicts the perfor-
mance comparison between compress versus the base-
line PyTorch masked select. We set the mask so that
Copyright © 20XX by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited

Figure 6.5:
Bandwidth of compress operator based on
MCScan (s = 32, 64, 128) against torch.masked select.
each mask entry is independently set to true or false uni-
formly at random. The figure indicates that the baseline
masked select operator is not optimized on Ascend,
and a code investigation reveals that the baseline does
not use the vector or cube units. On the other hand, our
Compress kernel reaches up to 160GB/s (20% of peak
memory bandwidth).
6.3
Radix Sort We modified the radix sort
operator to additionally return indices that correspond
to the input index of each output element.
This
modification ensures a fair comparison with the sort
operator provided by the PyTorch Ascend adapter.
The modification is based on the SplitInd operator
by keeping track of the output indices on each split
application.
Our radix sort implementation is stable
and supports unsigned (or signed) integers and floats
(fp16).
Figure 6.6: Comparison between radix sort and baseline
torch npu.sort() for half-precision (fp16).
Figure 6.6 shows the performance of a parallel fp16
radix sort implementation using MCScan with input data
type int8 (Algorithm 4.3) to perform the parallel split
step. For input lengths greater than 525K, our “text-
book” implementation of radix sort delivers a speedup
between 1.3× and 3.3× compared to the torch.sort()
baseline.
Performance Opportunities for small bit-width in-
puts We expect additional performance improvements
for low-precision data types (low bit-width) since the
number of radix sort iterations equals the input bit-
width. Indeed, the trend in AI accelerators is to intro-
duce low-precision formats like 8-bit floats or 4-bit in-
tegers (int4) [42]. Therefore, an additional performance
improvement (2×) for radix sorting in low-precision 8-
bit scenarios is expected without any extra development
effort, see Figure B.4.
6.4
Batched Scan Figure 6.7 depicts the perfor-
mance of the batched scan kernels on Ascend for varying
input batch sizes and input lengths equal to 65K. We
depict the memory bandwidth achieved for tiling param-
eters s = 16, 32, 64 and 128. Our proposed batch scan
operators for s = 64 and 128 reach up to 400 GB/s. In-
terestingly enough, for smaller values of s = 16, 32, the
performance of the proposed batch scan kernels is poor.
In addition, the performance of our proposed batch scan
kernel for s = 16 and the baseline is similar.
Figure 6.7:
Bandwidth of batched scan based on Algo-
rithm 4.1 for increasing batch sizes and s = 16, 32, 64, 128.
Input length is 65K.
6.5
Top-p Sampling Figure 6.8 depicts the exe-
cution time of drawing one sample using the top-p sam-
pler as it is implemented in the Llama3 model, see [39].
PyTorch corresponds to the Ascend implementation us-
ing the baseline sort and cumsum operators. The line-
plots with labels s = 32, 64, 128 are similar to the base-
line by replacing the sort() and cumsum() operators
with the proposed radix sort and multi-core scan, re-
spectively.
The figure shows that the baseline top-p
sampling implementation scales poorly, mainly because
Copyright © 20XX by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited

Figure 6.8:
Execution time (in milliseconds) of top-p
sampling of Llama3 operator for a single batch. The baseline
is labeled PyTorch and supports only discrete distributions
with at most 224 elements.
the baseline torch.cumsum operator is not optimized for
Ascend.
7
Conclusion We developed and evaluated effi-
cient parallel scan algorithms tailored to the Ascend ar-
chitecture by leveraging the power of the cube (matrix
multiplication) unit. Our results demonstrate substan-
tial performance improvements, with speedups ranging
from 5× to 9.6× compared to vector-only implementa-
tions for sufficiently large input lengths. Additionally,
we presented a multi-core Ascend scan algorithm that
fully utilizes both the cube and vector units of Ascend,
reaching up to 74.9% of the theoretical memory band-
width.
Last, we extended our contributions to include
crucial computational kernels for AI workloads, such as
parallel split, compress/compact, and top-p (nucleus)
sampling, all exhibiting significant performance gains.
Furthermore, our optimized implementation of radix
sort, which utilizes matrix multiplications for parallel
splits, showcases the potential of matrix engines in
enhancing complex operations, offering up to 3.3×
speedup over the baseline.
Copyright © 20XX by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited

References
[1] AMD,
AMD
CDNA
2
Architecture,
technical
report,
Advanced
Micro
Devices,
Inc.,
2022,
https://www.amd.com/system/files/documents/
amd-cdna2-white-paper.pdf. Accessed: 2024-09-09.
[2] L.
Arge,
M.
T.
Goodrich,
M.
Nelson,
and
N. Sitchinava, Fundamental parallel algorithms for
private-cache chip multiprocessors, in Proceedings of
Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Architec-
tures (SPAA), SPAA ’08, New York, NY, USA, 2008,
ACM, p. 197–206, https://doi.org/10.1145/1378533.
1378573.
[3] ARM, ARM architecture reference manual for a-
profile architecture, 2024, https://developer.arm.com/
documentation/ddi0487/ka/?lang=en.
[4] S. Baxter,
moderngpu 2.0.
https://github.com/
moderngpu/moderngpu/wiki, 2016.
[5] N. Bell and J. Hoberock, Chapter 26 - thrust: A
productivity-oriented library for cuda, in GPU Com-
puting Gems Jade Edition, W. mei W. Hwu, ed., Ap-
plications of GPU Computing Series, Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers Inc., Boston, 2012, pp. 359–371, https:
//doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-385963-1.00026-5.
[6] G. E. Blelloch, Scans as primitive parallel operations,
IEEE Transactions on Computers, 38 (1989), pp. 1526–
1538, https://doi.org/10.1109/12.42122.
[7] G. E. Blelloch, Prefix sums and their applications,
in Sythesis of parallel algorithms, Morgan Kaufmann
Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA, USA, 1st ed., 1990,
pp. 35–60.
[8] G. E. Blelloch, Vector models for data-parallel com-
puting, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 1990.
[9] G. E. Blelloch, Programming parallel algorithms,
Commun. ACM, 39 (1996), p. 85–97, https://doi.org/
10.1145/227234.227246.
[10] G. E. Blelloch, C. E. Leiserson, B. M. Maggs,
C. G. Plaxton, S. J. Smith, and M. Zagha, A com-
parison of sorting algorithms for the connection ma-
chine cm-2, in Proceedings of Symposium on Parallel-
ism in Algorithms and Architectures (SPAA), SPAA
’91, New York, NY, USA, 1991, Association for Com-
puting Machinery, p. 3–16, https://doi.org/10.1145/
113379.113380.
[11] R. Chowdhury, F. Silvestri, and F. Vella, A com-
putational model for tensor core units, in Proceedings
of Symposium on Parallelism in Algorithms and Ar-
chitectures (SPAA), Philadelphia, USA, 2020, ACM,
p. 519–521, https://doi.org/10.1145/3350755.3400252.
[12] R.
Chowdhury,
F.
Silvestri,
and
F.
Vella,
Algorithm design for tensor units, in International
Conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing
(Euro-Par), Lisbon, Portugal, 2021, Springer-Verlag,
p. 353–367.
[13] A. Dakkak, C. Li, J. Xiong, I. Gelado, and W.-
m. Hwu, Accelerating reduction and scan using tensor
core units, in Proceedings of the ACM International
Conference on Supercomputing (ICS), ICS ’19, Phoenix
AZ, 2019, ACM, p. 46–57, https://doi.org/10.1145/
3330345.3331057.
[14] J.
Domke,
E.
Vatai,
A.
Drozd,
P.
ChenT,
Y. Oyama, L. Zhang, S. Salaria, D. Mukunoki,
A. Podobas, M. WahibT, and S. Matsuoka, Ma-
trix engines for high performance computing: A paragon
of performance or grasping at straws?, in International
Conference on Parallel & Distributed Processing Sym-
posium (IPDPS), Los Alamitos, CA, USA, May 2021,
IEEE Computer Society, pp. 1056–1065, https://doi.
org/10.1109/IPDPS49936.2021.00114.
[15] Y. Dotsenko, N. K. Govindaraju, P.-P. Sloan,
C. Boyd, and J. Manferdelli, Fast scan algorithms
on graphics processors, in Proceedings of the ACM
International Conference on Supercomputing (ICS),
ICS ’08, New York, NY, USA, 2008, ACM, p. 205–213,
https://doi.org/10.1145/1375527.1375559.
[16] A. Gu and T. Dao, Mamba:
Linear-time sequence
modeling with selective state spaces, 2024, https://
openreview.net/forum?id=AL1fq05o7H.
[17] J. Hemstad, Lecture 24: Scan at the speed of light.
YouTube video, July 2024, https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=VLdm3bV4bKo. Online; posted on YouTube.
[18] A.
Holtzman,
J.
Buys,
L.
Du,
M.
Forbes,
and Y. Choi, The curious case of neural text de-
generation,
in International Conference on Learn-
ing Representations (ICLR), Addis Ababa, Ethiopia,
2020, OpenReview.net, https://openreview.net/forum?
id=rygGQyrFvH.
[19] L. H¨ubschle-Schneider and P. Sanders, Parallel
weighted random sampling, ACM Trans. Math. Softw.,
48 (2022), https://doi.org/10.1145/3549934.
[20] W. W. Hwu, D. B. Kirk, and I. El Hajj, Chapter 11
- prefix sum (scan), in Programming Massively Parallel
Processors (Fourth Edition), Morgan Kaufmann Pub-
lishers Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States,
fourth ed., 2023, pp. 253–256, https://doi.org/10.1016/
B978-0-323-91231-0.00006-9.
[21] W. W. Hwu, D. B. Kirk, and I. El Hajj, Program-
ming Massively Parallel Processors (Fourth Edition),
Morgan Kaufmann Publishers Inc., fourth ed., 2023,
https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-323-91231-0.00006-9.
[22] Intel Corporation, Intel architecture instruction set
extensions programming reference, technical report, In-
tel Corporation, 2022. Accessed: 2024-09-09.
[23] J. Johnson, M. Douze, and H. J´egou, Billion-scale
similarity search with GPUs, IEEE Transactions on Big
Data, 7 (2021), pp. 535–547, https://doi.org/10.1109/
TBDATA.2019.2921572.
[24] N. P. Jouppi and et al., In-datacenter performance
analysis of a tensor processing unit, in Proceedings
Copyright © 20XX by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited

of International Symposium on Computer Architecture
(ISCA), Toronto, ON, Canada, 2017, ACM, p. 1–12,
https://doi.org/10.1145/3079856.3080246.
[25] N. P. Jouppi and et al., Ten lessons from three gen-
erations shaped google’s TPUv4i:
Industrial product,
in Proceedings of International Symposium on Com-
puter Architecture (ISCA), Online – Worldwide, 2021,
IEEE, pp. 1–14, https://doi.org/10.1109/ISCA52012.
2021.00010.
[26] D. E. Knuth, The art of computer programming: sort-
ing and searching, vol. 3, Addison-Wesley Publishing
Co., USA, 2nd ed., 1998.
[27] A. Koike and K. Sadakane, A novel computational
model for GPUs with application to I/O optimal sorting
algorithms, in International Conference on Parallel &
Distributed Processing Symposium (IPDPS), Milan,
Italy, 2014, IEEE, pp. 614–623, https://doi.org/10.
1109/IPDPSW.2014.72.
[28] W. Kool, H. Van Hoof, and M. Welling, Stochastic
beams and where to find them:
The Gumbel-top-k
trick for sampling sequences without replacement, in
International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML),
K. Chaudhuri and R. Salakhutdinov, eds., vol. 97
of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, Long
Beach, California, USA, June 2019, PMLR, pp. 3499–
3508, https://proceedings.mlr.press/v97/kool19a.html.
[29] H. Kung and C. Leiserson, Systolic Arrays for
(VLSI), CMU-CS, Carnegie-Mellon University, Depart-
ment of Computer Science, 1978.
[30] S. Lakshmivarahan and S. K. Dhall, Parallel Com-
puting Using the Prefix Problem, Oxford University
Press, Oxford, United Kingdom, 1994.
[31] Y. Li, B. Zhou, J. Zhang, X. Wei, Y. Li, and
Y. Chen, Poster: RadiK: Scalable radix top-k selec-
tion on GPUs, in Proceedings of the ACM Sympo-
sium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Program-
ming (PPoPP), PPoPP ’24, New York, NY, USA, 2024,
ACM, p. 472–474, https://doi.org/10.1145/3627535.
3638478.
[32] Y. Li, B. Zhou, J. Zhang, X. Wei, Y. Li, and
Y. Chen, RadiK: Scalable and optimized GPU-parallel
radix top-K selection, in Proceedings of the ACM
International Conference on Supercomputing (ICS),
ICS ’24, New York, NY, USA, 2024, ACM, p. 537–548,
https://doi.org/10.1145/3650200.3656596.
[33] X. Liang, Ascend AI Processor Architecture and Pro-
gramming: Principles and Applications of CANN, El-
sevier Science, 2020.
[34] H. Liao, J. Tu, J. Xia, H. Liu, X. Zhou, H. Yuan,
and Y. Hu, Ascend: a scalable and unified architecture
for ubiquitous deep neural network computing: industry
track paper, in Proceedings of International Symposium
on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA),
Seoul, South Korea, 2021, IEEE, pp. 789–801, https:
//doi.org/10.1109/HPCA51647.2021.00071.
[35] H. Liao, J. Tu, J. Xia, and X. Zhou, DaVinci: A
scalable architecture for neural network computing, in
Hot Chips: A Symposium on High-Performance Chips
(HCS), Cupertino, CA, USA, 2019, IEEE, pp. 1–44,
https://doi.org/10.1109/HOTCHIPS.2019.8875654.
[36] J. Lin, J. Tang, H. Tang, S. Yang, W.-M. Chen,
W.-C. Wang, G. Xiao, X. Dang, C. Gan, and
S. Han, AWQ: Activation-aware weight quantization
for LLM compression and acceleration, in MLSys, Santa
Clara, California, USA, 2024, mlsys.org, pp. 1–14.
[37] Y. Matias, Parallel algorithms column: on the search
for suitable models, SIGACT News, 28 (1997), p. 21–29,
https://doi.org/10.1145/262301.262305.
[38] D. Merrill and M. Garland, Single-pass parallel
prefix scan with decoupled lookback, in Not available,
Santa Clara,
CA, USA, 2016,
NVIDIA, pp. 1–9,
https://research.nvidia.com/publication/2016-03
single-pass-parallel-prefix-scan-decoupled-look-back.
[39] Meta AI, Llama3 generation code - sample top p()
method. https://github.com/meta-llama/llama3/blob/
main/llama/generation.py#L358,
2024.
Accessed:
2024-09-24.
[40] NVIDIA, Cooperative primitives for CUDA C++,
2023, https://github.com/NVIDIA/cub.
[41] NVIDIA
Authors,
NVIDIA
DGX-1
with
Tesla
V100
system
architecture,
Tech.
Re-
port
MSU-CSE-06-2,
Nvidia
Corporation,
Dec.
2017,
https://images.nvidia.com/content/pdf/
dgx1-v100-system-architecture-whitepaper.pdf.
[42] NVIDIA
Corporation,
NVIDIA
A100
Tensor
Core GPU Architecture, 2020.
https://www.nvidia.
com/content/dam/en-zz/Solutions/Data-Center/
nvidia-ampere-architecture-whitepaper.pdf.
[43] M. Pharr and R. Fernando, GPU Gems 2: Pro-
gramming Techniques for High-Performance Graph-
ics and General-Purpose Computation (GPU Gems),
Addison-Wesley Publishing Co., Boston, USA, 2005.
[44] S. Sengupta, M. Harris, Y. Zhang, and J. D.
Owens, Scan primitives for GPU computing, in Pro-
ceedings of the Symposium on Graphics Hardware (Eu-
roGraphics), GH ’07, Goslar, DEU, 2007, Eurographics
Association, p. 97–106.
[45] N. Sitchinava and V. Weichert, Provably efficient
GPU algorithms, CoRR, abs/1306.5076 (2013), pp. 1–
25, https://arxiv.org/abs/1306.5076.
[46] M. Snir, Depth-size trade-offs for parallel prefix com-
putation, Journal of Algorithms, 7 (1986), pp. 185–201,
https://doi.org/10.1016/0196-6774(86)90003-9.
[47] L. Snyder, L. H. Jamieson, D. B. Gannon, and
H. J. Siegel, Algorithmically Specialized Parallel Com-
puters, Academic Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
United States, 1985.
[48] W. J. Starke, B. W. Thompto, J. A. Stuecheli,
and J. E. Moreira, IBM’s POWER10 processor,
Copyright © 20XX by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited

IEEE Micro, 41 (2021), pp. 7–14, https://doi.org/10.
1109/MM.2021.3058632.
[49] H. Touvron, T. Lavril, G. Izacard, X. Mar-
tinet, M.-A. Lachaux, T. Lacroix, B. Rozi`ere,
N. Goyal, E. Hambro, F. Azhar, A. Rodriguez,
A. Joulin, E. Grave, and G. Lample, Llama: Open
and efficient foundation language models, 2023, https:
//arxiv.org/abs/2302.13971.
[50] S. Yan, G. Long, and Y. Zhang, StreamScan: fast
scan algorithms for gpus without global barrier syn-
chronization, SIGPLAN Not., 48 (2013), p. 229–238,
https://doi.org/10.1145/2517327.2442539.
[51] J. Zhang, A. Naruse, X. Li, and Y. Wang, Parallel
top-k algorithms on GPU: A comprehensive study and
new methods, in Proceedings of the International Con-
ference for High Performance Computing, Networking,
Storage and Analysis (SC), SC ’23, New York, NY,
USA, 2023, ACM, https://doi.org/10.1145/3581784.
3607062.
[52] H. Zhu, C.-K. Cheng, and R. Graham, On the con-
struction of zero-deficiency parallel prefix circuits with
minimum depth, ACM Trans. Des. Autom. Electron.
Syst., 11 (2006), p. 387–409, https://doi.org/10.1145/
1142155.1142162.
[53] A. Zouzias and W. F. McColl, A parallel scan
algorithm in the tensor core unit model, in International
Conference on Parallel and Distributed Computing
(Euro-Par), vol. 14100 of Lecture Notes in Computer
Science, Limassol, Cyprus, 2023, Springer, pp. 489–502,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-39698-4 33.
A
AscendC Programming Model Recently,
a pipeline-based programming model for Ascend called
AscendC has been developed. AscendC allows its users
to build high-performance computational kernels for the
Ascend architecture. Such kernels are usually called As-
cendC operators. The AscendC programming model is
built on top of C++, and it allows its users to have
fine-grained control of Ascend’s hardware components,
such as MTEs, scalar, vector, and cube compute en-
gines. At the same time, AscendC eliminates many po-
tential problems, such as the need to explicitly synchro-
nize hardware components within AIC and AIV cores.
The AscendC programming model is based on a
multiple pipeline abstraction model. AscendC provides
users with some abstractions, including a context man-
ager object, tensors, queues, and buffers.
AscendC provides tensor structures as wrappers
over data allocated in the global or core’s local memory.
GlobalTensor is a structure that represents a buffer
in global memory.
In all operators, both input and
output data come from global tensors.
On the other
hand, LocalTensor represents a buffer in the core’s local
memory.
Users can allocate local tensors in one of
multiple possible hardware buffers (UB, L1, L0A, L0B,
etc.).
AscendC also provides the queues API – data
structures used for managing tensors and resolving data
dependencies between different hardware components
which work on the same tensors.
After a hardware
component interacts with a tensor the Enque method
is called, that saves the pointer into the queue. Then
when the next hardware component needs to interact
with the same tensor the Deque method is called, that
waits for the corresponding Enque to be called, ensuring
synchronization, and returns the pointer to the local
tensor.
This way, all data dependencies are explicit,
and the computational pattern is consistent across all
local tensors and all physical buffers.
Queues can
contain more than one tensor at a time – in many cases,
implementing double buffering comes down to changing
the queue capacity from the default value one to two.
Naturally, the model also defines dozens of possible
operations on tensors; we only mention some of the most
frequently used here:
• DataCopy. MTE’s function that copies data from
an input to an output tensor. The basic version
copies a number of continuous elements but can
also be configured for strides and automatic layout
transformations.
• Mmad.
AIC core’s function that multiplies two
input matrices (local tensors) and writes the result
to the output matrix (a local tensor). The result
can be accumulated with existing values in the
output tensor.
• Adds.
AIV core’s function that adds a scalar to
an input local tensor and writes the result to the
output local tensor.
• GatherMask.
AIV core’s function that takes an
input local tensor and a binary mask, also a local
tensor, and gathers all the elements from the input
tensor for which the corresponding value in the
mask is equal to 1. Gathered elements are stored
in the contiguous form in the output local tensor.
An operator is executed using multiple blocks –
block is the smallest logical execution unit. The user
specifies the number of blocks to be used when running
the kernel. Another critical function AscendC provides
is hardware synchronization among computing units –
SyncAll allows the user to synchronize all blocks. The
execution is continued only after each unit reaches the
synchronization point.
B
Additional Material for Scans
Copyright © 20XX by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited

B.1
Multiple (Batched) Scans The batched
scan computes the prefix sum of a batch of input arrays
of equal length in parallel. Given a scan algorithm for a
1D array, a corresponding batched scan algorithm could
be defined by deciding how to schedule the cube and
vector computations into the multiple cores.
1
0
1 1 1 1 ... 1 0 1 1 ...
x
+
+
+
+
Cube unit
Vector unit
Global Memory
1
0
x
+
+
+
+
Vector unit
1
2
3
3
1
2
3
Rowise scan of the i-th vector
Rowise scan of the (i + 1)-th vector
Parallel completion of scan for the i-th and (i + 1)-th vectors
Output
Input
Figure B.1: Batched scan algorithm based on ScanU. Blue
and green denote the input and output array, respectively.
Let’s discuss, as an example, a particular case where
ScanU is used as a building block. The batched algo-
rithm uses the same principles as the Algorithm 4.1 but
also considers the 2-to-1 ratio between the vector and
cube cores in the split Ascend architecture (910B). Fig-
ure B.1 depicts the main ideas behind our batched scan
algorithm in this case. The algorithm starts by com-
puting the local scans of size s of x of all input arrays.
Each cube core computes the local scans of a tile of
size ℓin two batches at the same time; once the tiles
of the first two batches are ready, two distinct vector
cores will complete the scans independently over each
batch by propagating the partial sums within the tiles.
This process is pipelined through AscendC to efficiently
use all available hardware (vector) resources. The sec-
ond batched scan algorithm extends ScanUL1 (Algo-
rithm 4.2) so that each AI core computes a scan on
a separate array in the batch.
Figure B.2 compares the two batched scan algo-
rithms presented for increasing input batch size and ar-
ray length. The first batched scan algorithm, based on
ScanU (Algorithm 4.1), is used as our reference/baseline.
Both algorithms have the same tiling strategy based on
the input shapes to ensure a fair comparison. The fig-
ure demonstrates that the algorithms perform well in
different cases and, more importantly, complement each
other. In particular, ScanU is superior when the batch
Figure B.2:
Execution time ratio between ScanUL1 and
ScanU batched scan algorithms for various array length (x-
axis) and batch sizes (y-axis). Baseline is ScanU.
size is greater than 18, and the input length is smaller
than 4K. On the other hand, ScanUL1 is superior when
the batch size is smaller than 18 and the input length
larger than 4K.
B.2
Exclusive and int8 scan Here, we discuss
a few extensions of the multi-core scan algorithm that
we have implemented. In particular, we added support
for exclusive scans and integer inputs. Typically, AI ac-
celerators support low-precision arithmetic since infer-
ence of deep learning models is robust to extreme levels
of quantization [36]. In particular, Ascend supports in-
put matrices of 8-bit integers with output/accumulation
in 32-bit integers. Since scan is a memory-bound oper-
ator, there is an opportunity to improve performance in
terms of elements per second processed; see Figure B.3.
We have implemented a specialization of Algorithm 4.3
for integers with 8 bits, which is extensively used in our
scan applications.
We implemented exclusive scan by writing the out-
put of the inclusive scan to global memory shifted by
one element, discarding the last value and writing zero
to the first position using the first block.
B.3
Weighted Sampling We implement a par-
allel weighted sampling kernel using the well-known in-
verse transform sampling approach and a scan to com-
pute the cumulative distribution. Given an array w of n
positive weights, the goal is to draw a sample with pro-
portional probability to the weights. The output is an
index i of w with probability proportional to wi. First,
we scan w, and then, given a uniform sample θ ∈[0, 1],
we invoke the SplitInd kernel with input scan(w) and
the element-wise predicate ? > θ ∗P
i wi. The last en-
try of the output indices array of SplitInd contains the
Copyright © 20XX by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited

weighted sample. For more advanced parallel weighted
sampling techniques, see [19].
The performance improvement of our proposed
weighted sampling kernel is not significant compared to
the baseline for a single sample. However, our imple-
mentation does provide a functional improvement com-
pared to the baseline operator. Indeed, the baseline As-
cend weighted sampling operator torch.multinomial
supports discrete distributions with support size up to
224 elements, whereas our approach can support distri-
butions with arbitrary support size.
We leave as fu-
ture work any further possible improvements on paral-
lel weighted sampling. In particular, for the multiple
sample generation scenario, the parallel alias table con-
struction of [19] seems to be a promising direction.
B.4
Scan on low bit-width data types Next,
we investigate the additional performance benefits of
taking advantage of the lower-precision input data (int8)
capability of the cube unit. Figure B.3 depicts the per-
formance of the multi-core scan algorithm in terms of
giga elements per second for input data types float16
and 8-bit integers (int8).
As depicted, there is only
a small performance improvement for relatively small
length, which is mainly due to our current implemen-
tation.
For example, additional performance can be
achieved since the Cube unit can multiply, in a single
instruction, matrices of sizes 128×256 and 256×128 in
int8.
Figure B.3:
Giga elements per second comparison of
MCScan for float16 (fp16) and 8-bit integers (int8) input data
types.
B.5
Radix sort on low bit-width inputs
Here, we provide an estimate of the expected perfor-
mance improvements of radix sort for the case where
the input data type has 4 or 8 bit-width.
To do so,
we measure the execution time of our radix sort kernel
by reducing the number of radix sort iterations from 16
to 4 or 8 (algorithmic correctness is not guaranteed).
Notice that we still read and write using 16 bits per el-
ement. Figure B.4 shows a significant performance im-
provement of roughly 1.5× and 3× of our radix sort
kernel for 8 and 4 bits inputs, respectively.
Figure B.4: Radix sort opportunity analysis for low bit-
width inputs.
Copyright © 20XX by SIAM
Unauthorized reproduction of this article is prohibited
